+++ 
draft = false
date = 2022-06-28T01:01:01-01:00
title = "Accelerating COVID-19 research with graph mining and transformer-based learning"
slug = "" 
aliases = [
  "/2021/accelerating/",
  "/2022/accelerating/",
]
authors = [
  "Ilya Tyagin",
  "Ankit Kulshrestha",
  "Justin Sybrandt",
  "Krish Matta",
  "Michael Shtutman",
  "Ilya Safro"
]
venue = "AAAI"
[[links]]
  name = "PDF"
  url = "/documents/2021_02_10_accelerating.pdf"
  weight = 10
+++

In 2020, the White House released the “Call to Action to the Tech Community on
New Machine Readable COVID-19 Dataset,” wherein artificial intelligence experts
are asked to collect data and develop text mining techniques that can help the
science community answer high-priority scientific questions related to COVID-19.
The Allen Institute for AI and collaborators announced the availability of a
rapidly growing open dataset of publications, the COVID-19 Open Research Dataset
(CORD-19). As the pace of research accelerates, biomedical scientists struggle
to stay current. To expedite their investigations, scientists leverage
hypothesis generation systems, which can automatically inspect published papers
to discover novel implicit connections. We present automated general purpose
hypothesis generation systems AGATHA-C and AGATHA-GP for COVID-19 research. The
systems are based on the graph mining and transformer models. The systems are
massively validated using retrospective information rediscovery and proactive
analysis involving human-in-the-loop expert analysis. Both systems achieve
high-quality predictions across domains in fast computational time and are
released to the broad scientific community to accelerate biomedical research. In
addition, by performing the domain expert curated study, we show that the
systems are able to discover ongoing research findings such as the relationship
between COVID-19 and oxytocin hormone. All code, details, and pre-trained models
are available at https://github. com/IlyaTyagin/AGATHA-C-GP.
